---
layout: post
title: Puppet
date: 2023-06-24 22:00 +0100
categories: [Systems, IaC]
tags: [iac, puppet, cheatsheet]  
---

+ Is declarative.
+ Consistent delivery.
+ Written in Ruby.
+ Is scalable.

# Use cases

+ Install packages.
+ Manage firewall rules.
+ Modify configuration files.
+ Manage services.
+ Manage users and groups.

# Puppet server architecture

+ Master - Agent model.
+ There is also a standalone model.

+ Agent **pulls** configuration from the master every 1800 (30 Mins) seconds by default.
+ There is also a **push** model available.

# Execution flow

1. The agent node initiates a secure SSL connection to the primary server (TCP 8140).
2. The agent send facts to the primary server.
3. The master uses facts to compile a catalog, this is the configuration to be applied in the agent.
4. After receiving the catalog, the agent applies the configuration.
5. The agent reports back to the master indicating that the configuration has been applied.

# Terminmolgy

+ **Resources**: The basic unit of configuration in Puppet. They are defined in the Puppet language and describe a single piece of system configuration, such as a file or a package.
+ **Classes**: A group of resources that can be grouped together and managed as a single unit. Multiple resources can be grouped together in a class.
+ **Manifests**: Directory containing puppet DSL files with the `.pp` extension. *pp* stands for Puppet Programming.
+ **Modules**: Collections of files and directories such as Manifests, Class definitions and any other files needed to describe a set of related resources. They are the re-useable units of Puppet code. Some examples: MySQL, Apache, Nginx, etc.

# Resources

+ Fundamental building blocks of Puppet.
+ Multiple inbuilt resources available.
+ There are three types of resources:
    + **Native**: Built-in resources.
    + **Defined**: Custom resources.
    + **Virtual**: Resources that are not applied to the system.

# Cheatsheet

+ `puppet --version`: Check the version of Puppet.
+ `puppet help`: Get help.
+ `puppet help resource`: Get help about a resource.
+ `puppet resource --types`: List all the available resources.
+ `puppet apply <manifest.pp>`: Apply a manifest.`